The Tuti-nama was one of the first manuscripts commissioned by the Mughal Indian Emperor
Akbar in 1560,
it’s artistic style fused together both Persian and Indian influences.
This was mirroring Akbar’s social and political desire to blend Muslim and Hindu cultures.
Within his kingship, Akbar aspired to use these manuscripts as a mode of expressing a
larger concept of nation and knowledge, he said manuscripts were
“ a source of wisdom and an antidote against the poison of ignorance.”
These manuscript images are depicting the 34th night of Tuti-nama, beginning with the
main character Khojisteh speaking with her beloved parrot about committing adultery
while her merchant husband’s away on a business trip. Khojisteh is asking the parrot
how she can test his understanding and wisdom. If he is wise, Khojisteh will
strengthen her friendship with him, if not, she will test her patience with him.
The parrot advises her to tell him the story of “How the son of the King of Babylon fall in Love with a Girl”,
and ask him for an answer to the story.
This story begins with the son of the Babylonian King entering a temple.
Once in the temple, the prince observes a beautiful girl and quickly becomes infatuated with her.
He says, “The brightness of whose countenance resembled the moon, as did her jetty locks the darkest night,
; her stature was as erect as the cypress, and her walk graceful as the pheasant.”
He was smitten by her charm.He lays down his head to the feet of the idol,
praying that if the young woman should marry him, he shall sever his head as a sacrifice.
Later that evening, he sends a letter to the beautiful girl’s father asking for her hand in marriage.
Her father consents and the two are united.
The idol the prince prays to is a faceless figure dressed in traditional Hindu clothing.
This gives the effect of an unknown or unspecified power, furthermore, that this spiritual being is not
bound to one single representation. Giving the audience power to interpret the divine Hindu figure as they
wish. It also could have been rubbed faceless later in time
to align with the Muslim tradition to prohibit depiction of the divine.
Days later the newlyweds are invited to the girl’s father’s house with the prince’s companion a Brahmin.
The prince sees the temple and remembers his sacrificial vow to the idol.The prince enters the temple alone,
kneeling before the idol he serves his own head.The Brahmin enters the temple looking for the prince and
finds him decapitated. The Brahmin is terrified at this horrific sight, and he believes people will deem
him the murderer because he has no alibi.He believes the only way to be considered innocent in the
beheading of the prince is to kill himself by cutting off his own head.
The wife of the prince walks into the temple minutes later, and is shocked to find her husband and the
Brahmin beheaded at the feet of the idol. In hysteria, she thinks about severing her own head to be
cremated with her new husband. When all of a sudden, she hears a mysterious voice talking to her from the statue,
that is now female. The voice tells her if she places her husband’s head on the Brahmins body,
and the Brahmin’s head on her husband’s body that they will be suddenly be brought back to life.
The beautiful wife does this, in a suspenseful moment like out of a horror movie,
both men are instantly brought back to life with their heads on each others bodies!
Immediately, a dispute between the husband’s head and the Brahmin’s head ensue,
both claiming the wife as their own. This story within a story ends here.
The parrot tells Khojisteh if she wants to test her lovers understanding and wisdom,
that she must ask which man in the story has the right to the wife.
Is it the husband’s head on the Brahmin’s body or the Brahmin’s head on the husband’s body?
The parrot states,
“the owner of the women is the head because the head is the seat of wisdom and presides over the body.”